---
layout: post
title:  "? architecture"
date:   2016-03-16 0:00:55
categories: Ruby
banner_image: sample-banner-image-1.jpg
comments: true
---

Ruby on Rails is a great framework for a quick start, but when a project gets much bigger, a lot of files in controllers, models and views folders can converts to a strong headache for a developer (especially if the developer made some bad decisions at the start of the project). Each edit affected to a big amount of files becomes a real problem. The best way to solve this problems is to use a good architecture from very start of developing the project: separate common parts, use modules and classes in right way etc.

The approach described in this article is called ? architecture (I found this term and a lot of other good stuff [here](http://fideloper.com/hexagonal-architecture) while working with modern PHP frameworks). This architecture extends a common MVC approach adding some new primitives to an application.  

So main primitives are:

- Commands
- Middleware
- Controllers
- Models
- Views
 
Models and views are the same as in the original RoR architecture, so I am not writing about them in this article. Commands are simple actions which don`t know where they will be implemented and what will happen with the results. Controllers initialize commands and run them through a middleware chain. Middleware (not to be confused with rake middleware) is where the magic begins. Middleware is class with a method to do something and call a next middleware. Want to return JSON or write response to a file? Add custom logger before or after command execution? Run commands asynchronously? Just add a middleware!

I’m using a project without views as an example and views aren’t described below but you can simply use this architecture for this type of projects as well. So let's take a closer look. 

## Modules

First of all, to avoid mess in the project it is needed to divide all files to modules. Each module has a one declaration file in models folder and two own folders - one in controllers and one in models. Module contains all the files related to it. The best way is to make modules highly separated from each over. The common examples of modules can be users module and files module.

## Command

The basic primitive in this architecture is a command. Command is a separated action, for instance creating an object or deleting it. Each command contains a validation part and main part that makes all needed actions. Execute method contains business logic and can return a hash or nothing if it doesn’t needed.

In the original RoR architecture there is only model validation, so why do we need to use action validation? With this approach you can easily check all input parameters and return to a user what is exactly wrong before running the main code of a command . After this you don’t need to catch any validation errors in the code and it becomes much more clear. Also you can add a model validation too.  

Each command must be inherited from the `Core::Command` class(or its child of course). Let's take a look at this class.

{% highlight ruby %}
# Contains common methods for commands
class Core::Command
  include ActiveModel::Validations

  attr_accessor :token

  # Fils a command with attributes
  # @param [Hash] attributes
  def initialize(attributes = {})
    attributes.each do |name, value|
      if methods.include? "#{name}=".to_sym
        method("#{name}=".to_sym).call(value)
      end
    end
  end

  # Runs command
  def execute
  end

  # Gets the model to validate
  # @return [Class]
  # @raise Core::Errors::NoModelToValidateError
  def model_to_validate
    fail Core::Errors::NoModelToValidateError
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

It includes `ActiveModel::Validations` module to do validation. Also there are a token attribute that is very common and needed for authorization and three methods:

- initialize - fills a command with given attributes and makes it very easy to use commands with different input parameters.
- execute - dummy method which must be overridden in every child
- model_to_validate - returns a model needed to some validation like exists validator and unique validator

Here is an example of command:

{% highlight ruby %}
# Deletes a goal command
class Goal::Command::GoalDeleteCommand < Core::Command
  attr_accessor :id

  validates :id, presence: true,
                 'Core::Validator::Exists' => ->(x) { { id: x.id, deleted_at: nil } }

  # Runs command
  # @return [Hash]
  def execute
    goal = Goal::Goal.where(id: id).first
    goal.deleted_at = DateTime.now.utc
    goal.save
    nil
  end

  # Gets the model to validate
  # @return [Class]
  def model_to_validate
    Goal::Goal
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

### Validation

You can use the same validators like in models and write your own. For instance, I wrote four common validators:

- Exists
- Unique
- Content Type
- Uri

Exists and unique validators use `model_to_validate` method and have as a parameter a lamba function to use the result in the query

{% highlight ruby %}
  validates :id, presence: true,
                 'Core::Validator::Exists' => ->(x) { { id: x.id, deleted_at: nil } }
{% endhighlight %}

## Controller

As all logic is in commands, in controllers you need just to initialize command and run it. This is how it looks like:

{% highlight ruby %}
# Goal controller
class Goal::GoalController < Core::Controller
  # Shows a goal
  # @see Goal::Command::GoalViewCommand
  def view
    command = Goal::Command::GoalViewCommand.new(params)
    run(command)
  end

  # Updates a goal
  # @see Goal::Command::GoalUpdateCommand
  def update
    command = Goal::Command::GoalUpdateCommand.new(params)
    run(command)
  end

  # Deletes a goal
  # @see Goal::Command::GoalDeleteCommand
  def delete
    command = Goal::Command::GoalDeleteCommand.new(params)
    run(command)
  end

  # Adds or removes points
  # @see Goal::Command::GoalPointsUpdateCommand
  def points_update
    command = Goal::Command::GoalPointsUpdateCommand.new(params)
    run(command)
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

`Core::Controller` has two methods:

- middleware_list - to get the list of needed middleware
- run - to run a command through this middleware

## Middleware

